Oh, good.
Uh, that's what I want.
Oh, very hard to do this so far away, but there we go.
All right.
So thank you all for being here, um, and sticking with me after those two amazing
talks, it'll be hard to follow that up and it's quite a different topic, but I
will try my best, um, and, uh, share with you how you can use, uh, Jupyter widgets
to supercharge your shiny for Python.
And this doesn't work either.
Great.
All right.
Um, and when I talk about Jupyter widgets, I'm generally going to be
referring to any Python code that you can execute in a Jupyter notebook cell
and get a web based output results.
And, uh, if you've ever written Python code before in a notebook and displayed
that data, you've already used a Jupyter widget in this sense, because we're
executing Python, uh, code to get a web based results.
And, but that being said, you know, kind of the default, uh, rendering of
a data frame is a pretty basic widget.
Um, you get a limited amount of interactivity with it.
Um, but they can get a whole lot more sophisticated.
Yeah.
So a great example of this is the quack package, which is a new Python package
that makes it super easy to, you just give it a data frame and it creates a
much more sophisticated interactive table.
And this table sort of just comes with the ability to drill down
into certain values of your data.
So it gives you these nice graphics at the top where you can choose certain values
here, I'm choosing certain values of sex and a certain range of height.
And that will drill down and just to the rows that, um, match those queries.
And in addition here, notice that I also executed another code cell after
interacting with the table to get the SQL attributes, uh, of this widget,
which actually captures the filtered state of the data.
So it's almost as if we can in Python through the Python object, access
information about what the user is doing with the widget, right?
So these are two really great examples that helped me kind of frame this idea
that there are two broad categories of widgets when you're working in Jupyter.
Um, the most broad category, which really encompasses all widgets
is the idea of a one-way binding.
Which really all I mean by that is that you have some Python code that you're
executing to get a web-based results.
And any interactivity that you get from that widget, it's all
happening inside of JavaScript.
There's no communication back to Python.
Everything is just kind of baked in and predefined.
And, uh, if there's any interactivity, it's likely JavaScript.
Now the two-way binding has the additional ability to send data and
information back and forth between Python and JavaScript.
And actually with the Jupyter widget two-way binding, they have this
concept of state, both existing, both in JavaScript and Python.
And, um, the framework that makes this possible, uh, will sort of
automatically in some sense, detect when state changes on the front end,
say in JavaScript through drilling down in our table, automatically, there will
be some messages sent back to Python to update the Python object with that state.
And also vice versa, you can also update, uh, Python objects
to then, uh, update the front end.
Right.
So one of the nice things about working with a one-way binding, as you
can imagine with the two-way binding, there's a whole lot more complexity
and overhead with, you know, passing data back and forth between Python and
JavaScript, if the one-way binding kind of does the job for you, that's a great
option because you can do kind of better, simpler things with it.
Like, you know, not even working in notebook, you could take that Python
code to create like a static webpage, maybe inside of a quarto document.
But it's also kind of fundamentally more limited in this sense.
Uh, mainly, you know, because we can't access any information about what's
happening on the front end with our Python code, like we can't take, you
know, what the user is doing to inform, um, other things in a web application.
Right.
So really what I mean by that, like, uh, the, the thing that makes, um, uh, this
interesting from the interactivity perspective is that we can kind of access
the state of what's happening on the front end and link multiple views in the
sense of like they're sharing the state of what's happening to that Python object.
Right.
So if we go back to our interactive table with drill down capabilities,
uh, you can imagine since we can actually access like what filtered data
has been filtered in this table, we could take that data and route it to
another view that maybe gives us like a higher dimensional picture of what's
happening just in that filtered data.
Right.
The other big thing that the two way binding, um, gives us as a
feature is this idea of mutable state.
Which really means, you know, imagine you have a widget that you've just rendered
and maybe you want to, um, just, uh, change a particular value of a particular
attributes, which you can do is just mutate that Python objects, give it a
new value for certain attributes.
And just that change in states is sent to the front end.
So in order to update a view, you can do it a lot more performantly by just
sending only what has changed, um, from Python to JavaScript, right?
So to give you a simple, concrete example of this, imagine I had a
dropdown where I could choose different cities and just update the center of
a map from, um, one city to the next.
If I were to try to do this by re rendering the map from scratch, every
time you would get a little bit of graying out and flickering every time
that map updates, but by just telling the front end that only the center of
the map has changed, it's able to smoothly transition from one location to the next.
All right.
So going back to our diagram here, there's actually like a formal name
and standard and implementation of this two-way binding, which is
provided by the IPyWidgets package.
And you as a user might not actually end up importing from IPyWidgets.
Uh, you may, maybe you just want to use, um, the Quack package or Plotly or Altair.
Um, and all of these packages that provide this two-way binding interface
are going to inherit from this widget class from IPyWidgets, because it kind
of provides the foundation for passing that state back and forth
between Python and JavaScript.
And as we'll see shortly, the ShinyWidgets package has a render widget
decorator that allows us to render IPyWidgets in Shiny and leverage all of
those nice things that come with the two-way binding.
And most of the projects that you've heard of, um, are going to
provide two-way binding interfaces.
So big names like Plotly, Leaflet, Bokeh, Vega, Altair, Mapbox, um,
has a binding called PyDeck.
All of these projects tend to provide a two-way binding interfaces.
And more than that, a lot of these big projects will also provide a
one-way binding interface, which, you know, makes a whole lot of sense, uh,
for the, especially from their perspective that sometimes, you know,
the one-way binding does the job.
Maybe you don't even want to work, uh, in a Jupyter notebook.
Maybe you just want a script that, um, creates a static webpage or
embedded in a Quarto document.
Um, just having basically the static results with JavaScript, um, you
know, requires a lot less overhead.
So, um, ShinyWidgets can actually handle both of these cases.
And what it will do is it will automatically transform a one-way binding.
If you give it, if you give this one-way binding to, um, ShinyWidgets, it will
automatically transform the one-way binding to a two-way binding.
And this makes getting started with ShinyWidgets, um, a whole lot easier
because a lot of these packages like Altair, I'm just using Altair as an
example here, but this is true for like Plotly and a lot of other packages.
Where the one-way binding is kind of at the heart of their
documentation and code examples.
So if you actually look up Altair, you'll see Altair chart all over the place.
So it's very convenient to just kind of dump those code examples
into ShinyWidgets and it just works.
All right.
So let's get a feel for, you know, the code that you're actually going to
write in order to use IPv6.
The first thing you're going to want to do is start by importing ShinyWidgets.
And then you can use this render widget decorator to create a rendering function.
And all you need to really make sure to do in this function
is to return a widget object.
Now, if we were to take this kind of template and go back to our
Quack widget that we started off with, we could start off very simple
in the Shiny app by just reading in the data and making sure this
rendering function returns the interactive table widget.
Right.
So we'd get a very basic result close to this.
It would just be the table that you see on the top half here.
But let's take that another step further and have a code chunk just
below that, that will automatically update to show the SQL statement
that mirrors the filtered data state.
And sort of have a Shiny app that reactively updates that code cell
whenever the user makes changes.
Right.
So let's go back to our simple Shiny app that just renders the table
widget and let's add another rendering function here.
I'm going to take the render code decorator from Shiny and I'm going
to create another output essentially.
And the first thing that this rendering function is going to want to do is
gain a reference to the widget that has been rendered, and this can be a
little bit awkward because there's scoping involved where you're inside
of a different function, you're returning a widget object, so to make
this a little bit more convenient, what the render widget decorator will
do is actually attach a widget attribute where you can get at the
return value of that function.
Right.
And if you recall to like the original notebook example that I
showed at the beginning, we were executing a code cell that said
essentially like w.sql to get at the SQL statement, and we can do this
in a reactive sense where if we use this reactive read function to
essentially read the SQL attribute, we're doing this in a reactive way
that tells Shiny to say, hey, whenever this attribute changes, please
invalidate the reactive context and essentially, you know, re-render
the code block when SQL changes.
So now we have this Shiny app that we're looking for, where now the
user can come in and drill down and the SQL will update to reflect
the changes in state.
All right, let's take this one step further and go back to that original
linked views app that I showed that has this ability to actually show
you like a multidimensional picture.
Here, I'm choosing a bin scatterplot of height versus weight and have
that automatically update to just be showing what data that we've
chosen in our tape.
All right, so instead of a render code block, we're going to go back to
render widgets and this time return an Altair chart instead of returning
the SQL verbatim, and the start of the implementation of that render widget
is very similar in the sense that we take a reactive dependency on the
SQL statements behind the table to make sure that this like widget
re-renders when that changes.
And then feed in the filtered data to an Altair chart API and
create the bin scatterplot.
All right, and this point, I would just kind of like to take a step
back and have us take a moment to appreciate that IPy widgets were
designed for notebooks, not for Shiny.
And the fact that we can even create something like Shiny widgets and,
you know, leverage over a decade's worth of work in the Python community
inside of Shiny for Python like this is really a matter of technical
coincidence, and like there was no guarantee when we started Shiny for
Python, like we were kind of scratching our heads, how are we going to, you
know, allow people to use these rich interactive outputs in a way that
they're kind of familiar with already?
And it's kind of a miracle almost in some sense that there was two kind of
parallel worlds evolving over the last decade.
IPy widgets kind of came out around the same time as Shiny, like
2012 or something like that.
And there's been over a decade of a lot of development and work
in building upon this standard.
All right.
So to give you a little bit of a picture of how we're able to kind of
hook into the IPy widgets architecture, let's actually kind of take a kind of
a simplified view of the architecture that's necessary to power IPy widgets.
And here I have this diagram where on the left-hand side, you know, we have
the Python end and on the right-hand side, we have the front end in JavaScript.
And whenever you create and display a new Jupyter widget in Python, what
happens is the widget object sends some data and some information to what the
IPy widgets developers call a com layer, which stands for communication layer,
that will kind of orchestrate a message passing in a way that will power all
of the widgets necessary in a notebook.
So it kind of receives some data from the widget, passes that along to a front
end where there's kind of a similar communication layer.
And then that communication layer will then kind of know how to get to the
necessary JavaScript libraries and take that data and actually
render it as a interactive view.
Right.
So once we're rendered and the user kind of maybe comes in and interacts with the
widget and introduces some changes to state, that widget view will know how to
send data to the com layer to say, Hey, I have some state that has changed.
Com layer passes that back all the way back to the Python object on the back end.
Right.
And one of the interesting bits here is, you know, the widget implementations
like Plotly, Leaflet, Altair, they're all going to be kind of responsible for
this part of the stuff that happens that's very close to the actual widget
object and the JavaScript view.
But kind of more of the backend architecture of the com layer, this is
all provided by IPyWidgets and is just kind of generically handles all
different widget implementations.
And it turns out these IPyWidget developers were very thoughtful about how
they actually design the software for these com layers, where they've designed
them to be abstract and pluggable by other environments so that you can
actually kind of, they've been thoughtful about somebody like me coming in and
wanting to use these widgets in another environment.
And it just so happens, like that's not necessarily good enough to, you know,
leverage widgets in a framework like Shiny, but it just so happens that Shiny
works through message passing in a very similar way that allows us to create
something like Shiny widgets and have it be interoperable with Shiny.
All right.
So in summary, widgets are either one-way or two-way bindings.
The two-way bindings are called IPyWidgets and are much more capable.
And, you know, you're able to achieve a lot more with interactivity
and performance with these widgets.
And thanks to their open standard and the thoughtfulness of the IPyWidget
developers, we can leverage IPyWidgets inside of Shiny for Python.
And thank you for listening.